Phil: Do-do-do-do-do (singing)
Hey guys it's Phil from Smilinggardener.com,
if you haven't picked up my free online organic
gardening course you ca do that right on the
homepage of Smilinggardener.com. Today I'm
going to be doing some planting and seeding
so I'm going to show you 3 things. I'm going
to show you seed bed preparation to make the
soil ready, I'm going to show you sowing seeds,
how to plant seeds, and planting vegetables
and just planting flowers and other small
herbs and things like that. So 3 things today.
What I will be using today is a hoe just to
get those last weeds that have come up in
the last couple of weeks. You can see behind
me I have some members of the allium family,
a few onions, a few garlic that I could take
out, it would make for a nice clean bed, but
I'd rather leave them in there because then
I have just more biodiversity in the garden.
The next important step here is to take the
hard rake and level everything out and the
cool thing about doing that is when you do
it it's almost like your tilling half and
inch because you're just kind of lightly using
the rake and it makes a really nice place
to put your seeds into. So that's what I'm
going to do now, making everything nice and
level. The mulch is on now and you can see
I actually put a reasonably thick layer I
just have to make sure wherever I put seeds
that I don't have too thick of a layer of
straw. Another thing I was going to mention
is I like to water the garden before I plant.
Not right before because you don't want to
be working in really mucky soil. But like
an hour before or the night before it really
makes planting a lot easier. I'm kind of doing
like a modified 3 sisters guild here, where
I'm planting corn and beans and squash. It's
a native-American method of planting these
together for all the benefits that they bring
each other. And there's actually a 4th sister
called cleome so I'm going to plant a few
cleomes today. As I mentioned in my video
last week this corn is not ready to plant
it really needs another week or so to get
a better root system, so I'm a little concerned
it's going to fall apart when I plant and
well I hope it doesn't! The reason I'm planting
today (as I've said before as well) is I'm
heading out of town tomorrow for nearly 3
weeks so I really have to get these things
in today. I have to seed today and I have
to hope that when I get back that this stuff
is all going to be alive. To prepare the planting
hole here you could use a little trowel. One
thing often like to use is a fork, and I just
kind of dig up the hole's soil, not too deep
but just deep enough to loosen everything.
And that gives a nice planting bed and it
makes it really easy to plant with just my
hands. You always want to remove the pot when
you plant. I think that's pretty obvious for
plastic but even if you have any kind of burlap
or fiber pot or even like a biodegradable
pot as they call it, you always want to remove
it because it really doesn't want to be in
there with the plant. And I spray them with
effective microorganisms and kelp and see
minerals - all these kind of biostimulants
I've talked about. On the root ball. you can
spray the leaves too. And while I'm at it,
I take a little bit of my micorhhizal fungal
powder, I just rub the on the roots doesn't
have to go everywhere. To plant it now I can
just dig with my hands basically, kind of
remove the clumps. Put it down in there and
with something like this you just want the
top of this to be level with the top of your
soil. And then you want to fill it back in
with the same soil that's already there. It
doesn't look like that exciting of soil but
I know that I amended it with compost about
a month ago, so I know that it's in good shape.
And same with the fertilizers that I put in
there. I really want to press it down - not
that I want to compact the soil but it needs
to have good soil around it. I'm going to
plant 4 corns per whole about 6 inches apart
just in a diamond shape and that's one of
the ways that the three sisters are put together
like that. Gently, very gently kind of squeeze
on the bottom of the container and push the
plant out and you try not to pull on the stem
other than just guiding it with the stem.
Especially today I have to be very careful.
Yay!! So we have a plant here, now this was
one of the taller ones so it's probably going
to having a better root system but at least
that came out in one piece. I don't need to
spray this with any of my liquid or micorrhyzal
fungi because I did that when I seeded and
I've been watering with the liquid throughout
the week so it's all ready to go. One corn
down 47 more to go! Now we're onto sewing
seeds! And the first thing that I do before
I sew seeds is, as I've said before, is I
soak them first for about 6-12 hours in - it
could be just water - but I usually include
some liquid kelp and/or some liquid sea minerals
and that's going to give the seeds some minerals
for when they sprout, so they have all these
trace minerals they need and the kelp gives
them some natural plant growth hormones that
really help with that early germination and
growing process. Here I have my pole bean
seeds, these are what are going to climb up
the corn and use the corn as a trellis and
these are my squash seeds these big guys here,
legumes like beans and peas do really well
if they have their nitrogen-fixing inoculant
on them. There may be some of those bacteria
in the soil but there may not be. So if I
just take a little bit of this inoculant and
sprinkle it on, as I've shown you before.
And the next one I can put on ALL the seeds
is my micorrhizal inoculant which again is
in a powder form so I just sprinkle it on.
I can put that on the cucumbers and squash
as well. And now these are inoculated and
they're going to be that much happier. So
I can dig a little hole with my finger here
to plant the seed, place it down in there
and just cover it up with nice powdery soil
so you almost want to rub your soil between
your fingers to make sure it's really nice
and powdery. I could water these in now but
since I watered the garden before I don't
have to. So I'll actually water tomorrow.
And then I'll be watering every day until
these seeds germinate and then it'll slowly
decrease in the amount of watering I need
to do. So if you have any questions about
preparing a seed bed, or planting vegetables
or flowers or sowing seeds, ask them in the
questions down below. If you haven't picked
up my free online organic gardening course
you can do that down below and you can come
and join me and my sister over on Facebook
at facebook/com/smilinggardener.